Paracetamol - a curriculum resource
Frank Ellis

RSeC
ROYAL SOCIETY OF CHEMISTRY

Paracetamol - a curriculum resource
Compiled by Frank Ellis
Edited by Colin Osborne and Maria Pack
Designed by lmogen Bertin
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
Printed by the Royal Society of Chemistry
Copyright 0 Royal Society of Chemistry 2002
Registered charity No. 207890
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or review, as
permitted under the UK Copyright Designs and Patents Act, 1988, this publication may not be
reproduced, stored, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing
of the publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction, only in accordance with the terms of the
licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the terms of licences
issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights Organisation outside the UK. Enquiries concerning
reproduction outside the terms stated here should be sent to the Royal Society of Chemistry at the
London address printed on this page.
Notice to all UK Educational Institutions. The material in this book may be reproduced by photocopying
for distribution and use by students within the purchasing institution providing no more than 50% of the
work is reproduced in this way for any one purpose. Tutors wishing to reproduce material beyond this
limit or to reproduce the work by other means such as electronic should first seek the permission of the
Society.
While every effort has been made to contact owners of copyright material we apologise to any copyright
holders whose rights we may have unwittingly infringed.
For further information on other educational activities undertaken by the Royal Society of Chemistry
contact:
Education Department
Royal Society of Chemistry
Burlington house
Piccadilly
London W1j OBA
EmaiI:
Tel:

education@rsc.org
020 7440 3344

Information on other Royal Society of Chemistry activities can be found on its websites:
http ://www. rsc .org
http ://www .c hemsoc .org
http://www.chemsoc.org/LearnNet contains resources for teachers and students from around the world.

ISBN 0-85404-375-6
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data.
A catalogue for this book is available from the British Library

Contents
H o w to use this book ................................................................................................

2

Background information ...........................................................................................

3

Paracetamol i s a common compound .......................................................................

3

The history of paracetamol ........................................................................................

3

Experimental and investigation section .....................................................................

6

The extraction and purification of paracetamol from tablets ......................................

6

Paracetamol form u I at ions : presentat ion activity ........................................................

7

The preparation of paracetamol ................................................................................ 8
Step 1 .
the nitration of phenol ................................................................................. 9
Step 2 .
the reduction of a nitro group to an amine ................................................. 11
Step 3 .
the formation of an amide .........................................................................
12
The quantitative andysis of various formulations of paracetamol ............................

13

Using thin-layer chromatography to investigate the reactions ..................................

15

Teachers’ note.$ .......................................................................................................

18

The toxicity of paracetamol .....................................................................................

19

Apparatus lists and answers ....................................................................................

20

How to use this book
This book consists of seven freestanding activities that can be used singly or as a
coherent package in a wide range of teaching and learning situations in both academic
and vocational courses. It is aimed at post-16 chemistry students and their teachers.
The book is organised into t w o main sections - a series of student activities and a
guide for teachers and technicians with equipment lists and answers. Within the
section for students there are both written and practical tasks. The practical tasks are
both preparative/analytical and problem solving. The student sheets can also be freely
down loaded from http://www.chemsoc.org/networks/learnnet/paracetamol.htm.

Nomenclature
For ease of use some traditional names are retained for chemicals throughout this
booklet. Below are listed the traditional names against the systematic names that are
commonly used in post-1 6 chemistry courses in the UK.

I Traditional name/trade name

I Systematic name

I

I Acetanilide
I Paracetamol

I N- Pheny Iethanamide
1 N-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)ethanamide

I
I

I Phenacetin

I

Phenol

1 N-(4 E hoxy pheny I)ethanamide
- t

I

Hydroxybenzene

Health and safety
Teachers must consult their employer’s risk assessments before commencing any
practical activity. It i s good practice to encourage students to do so also. However, this
does not absolve teachers from their responsibility to check students’ plans and
supervise the activity. Eye protection and other appropriate protective equipment
should be worn for all the experiments in this booklet. The following texts are
available to give guidance on health and safety and assessing risk:
Safeguards in the School Laboratory, 10th edition, ASE, 1996
Topics in Safety, 3rd Edition, ASE, 2001
Hazards, CLEAPSS, 1995 (or 1998, 2000 updates)
Laboratory Handbook, CLEAPSS, 2001
Safety in Science Education, DfEE, HMSO, 1996
Hazardous Chemicals. A manual for science education, SSERC, 1997 (paper).
Hazardous Chemicals. An interactive manual for science education, SSERC, 2002
(CD-ROM).
Further information can be obtained from:
CLEAPSS School Science Service at Brunel University, Uxbridge, UB8 3PH; tel
01 895 251496; fax 01 895 81 4372; email science@cleapss.ot-g.uk or visit the
website http://www.cleapsss.org.uk (accessed August 2002).
Scottish School Equipment Resource Centre (SSERC).Contact SSERC at St Mary’s
Building, 23 Holyrood Road, Edinburgh, EH8 8AE; tel 01 31 558 81 80, fax 01 31
558 81 91, email sts@sserc.org.uk or visit the website http://www.sserc.org.uk
(accessed August 2002).

I

Background information
1. Paracetamol is a common compound

The structure of paracetamol
Paracetamol is a very widely used medicine. It i s a mild painkiller and reduces the
temperature of patients with fever. These actions are known respectively as analgesic
and antipyretic.
There are currently more than 90 common products containing paracetamol which are
available over the counter from British pharmacies. Many of them are sold as
treatments for the relief of cold and influenza and they can be bought in a number of
different formulations. Paracetamol i s a relatively safe drug but toxic side effects have
been observed with high doses greater than 10-1 5 g.
This toxicity is due to the chemical structure of the compound and the way our bodies
break it down. It i s metabolised to a reactive intermediate at high doses.
Pure paracetamol is a white crystalline solid which melts at 169-1 71 "C. Its solubility
in cold water is 1.43 d l 0 0 cm3 but it is much more soluble in hot water (5 d100 cm3)
and in ethanol (1 4 d100 cm3).

2. The history of paracetamol
At the University of Strassburg in the 1880s Professor Kussmaul, of the Department of
Internal Medicine, asked two assistants to give naphthalene as a treatment for intestina
worms.
The medicine had little effect on worms, but one patient had a great reduction in fever
temperature. It was found that this patient had, in fact, been given acetanilide instead
of naphthalene due to a mistake at the pharmacy!

Acetanilide

Naphthalene
The young assistants quickly published the discovery of this new antipyretic (feverreducing drug). It was soon in production and remained in use for several years
because it was so cheap to produce. However, it had a serious side effect involving the
deactivation of some of the haemoglobin in red blood cells.

RSaC

Background information - page I of 3

The publication of news about acetanilide immediately spurred a chemist at Bayer’s
dyeworks to make some derivatives:

N-(4-Ethoxyphenyl)ethanamide
(Phenacetin)

These were both found to be antipyretic and N-(4-ethoxyphenyl)ethanamide was less
toxic than acetanilide itself. It was promptly marketed as ’Phenacetin’ and has
remained in use ever since. However, restrictions have been placed o n its use due to
kidney damage in long-term users.
Many medicines were synthesised to try to improve on phenacetin and as early as
1893 Joseph von Mering made paracetamol.

N-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)ethanamide

(Paracetamol)

H e found it to be an effective antipyretic and analgesic, but wrongly thought that it
caused the same haemoglobin problem as acetanilide.
It was not until the 1940s that paracetamol was reinvestigated after it was found
present in patients dosed with phenacetin. In 1953 paracetamol was marketed by
Sterling-Winthrop Co., and promoted as preferable to aspirin since it was safe to take
for children and people with ulcers. However, it causes liver damage from chronic use.

Paracetamol is rapidly formed i n the guts of people w h o take phenacetin. It is the
major metabolite (decomposition product) and it i s likely that the antipyretic and
analgesic effects of phenacetin were in fact due to paracetamol.
There are some suggestions that the toxic effects of phenacetin were due to a minor
metabolite - the N-oxide.
Phenacetin is metabolised to two compounds. One involves the removal of the ethyl
(CH,CH,-) substituent from oxygen. The second involves the replacement of the
hydrogen atom on nitrogen by a hydroxyl (-OH)group. This type of compound i s
called a hydroxamic acid. Hydroxamic acids bind strongly to metal ions. This action
may contribute to the toxicity.

0

Background information - page 2 of 3

RSeC

Paracetamol

Hydroxamic acid

Methods of establishing the safety and efficacy of medicines
At the turn of the 20th century the discovery and testing of medicines was a largely
haphazard process with the pioneers of high quality science such as Pasteur and
Erhlich being exceptions. As in the history of paracetamol, new compounds were
given to patients almost immediately after synthesis or discovery.
In contrast, the development of modern medicines is a long and expensive process
typically taking 10-12 years. Chemistry is used at all stages to develop the synthesis
and determine purity. Potential patients need to know at least four things about a new
medicine before they take it. Does it work? Is it safe? H o w much do I take? H o w
often do I take it?
The answer to the first question i s initially investigated in isolated enzyme or cellular
systems before being trialed in animal models and ultimately in volunteer patients.
Clinical trials are used in the later stages to see if a new medicine works in one set of
patients compared to the effects of a placebo on another group.
The only way to determine safety and dosage regimes are to use animal models before
human volunteers take the medicine.

Task
Consider the ethical considerations of testing new medicines on animals.

R9C

Background information - page 3 of 3

Experimental and
investigative section

8

The extraction and purification of
paracetamol from tablets
This can be used to find out which brand of paracetamol contains the greatest quantity
of active ingredient.

Safety
Wear eye protection.

Propanone - volatile, highly flammable, keep away from flames, do not inhale vapour.
Paracetamol tablets - do not ingest.
A full risk assessment should be carried out prior to starting the experiment.

Warm two paracetamol tablets with propanone (20 cm3) in a small conical flask by
placing the flask in warm water.
Once the tablets have broken up, the undissolved material (binding agents and
filler) should be removed using a filter paper and funnel. Allow the propanone to
evaporate, either overnight or on a warm water bath in a fume cupboard.
The white solid is crude paracetamol. Keep a small amount of the solid to
determine its melting point later. The material can be purified by recrystallisation
from water.
This process relies on the fact that paracetamol is not very soluble in cold water
(1.4 g / l O O cm3)but very soluble in hot water (5 g/100 cm3). When the crude solid is
heated in water it will dissolve and any insoluble impurities can be filtered off. The
impurities which are soluble will also of course dissolve. When the hot solution i s
cooled down, it reaches the temperature at which paracetamol reaches its limit of
solubility and therefore starts to crystallise out. However, the soluble impurities are
only present to the level of a few percent and so never reach their limit of solubility
and thus stay in solution.
Heat the solid in about 10 cm3 of water to dissolve it, and filter off any insoluble
material through a very small piece of cotton wool in a warm glass funnel. (Pour
hot water through the funnel and cotton wool first.)

Cool the filtrate, and filter off the crystals that form.
Dry the pure paracetamol by either pressing with filter papers or gently warming in
an oven. Take the melting point, and compare it with that of your crude sample
and the quoted melting point of pure paracetamol.

Question
Why might the melting points be different?

Extraction and purification of paracetamol from tablets - page 7 of 7

RSaC

Paracetamol formulations:
presentation activity
Paracetamol can be taken in a number of ways and can be bought in many different formulations. Common ones
are tablets (500 mg), fizzy dispersible tablets (500 mg), paediatric oral solutions (120 mg/5 cm3), oral suspensions
(250 mg/cm3), and suppositories (125 mg). It is also sold in capsules as a mixture with other active ingredients such
as codeine and caffeine. Work in small groups and discuss why there might be advantages in having a number of
formulations. Comment on the doses available and suggest a target group for each one. Present your findings to the
group, perhaps as a poster or as an audio-visual presentation eg Powerpoint presentation.

Hints on presentations
In the presentation you could include the following:
the conditions that paracetamol helps to relieve or cure, including technical terms such as analgesic, antipyretic
and anti-inflammatory;
the side effects of paracetamol, and the alternative treatments for people who are affected by them;
the historical development of paracetamol, including the achievements of those responsible for the main
develop me nts;
the chemistry involved in developing the medicine in a usable form; and
the nature and importance of clinical trials.
You may find information in reference books, in libraries, in pharmacies and by contacting the ABPl (Association of
the British Pharmaceutical Industry, 12 Whitehall, London, SW1A 2DY, http://www.abpi.org.uk Tel: 020 7930
3 4 7 7) or phar maceut ica I cornpan ies .

A recommended website is http://www.pharmweb.net/pwmirror/pwy/paracetamol/pharmwebpic.html
August 2002).

(accessed

Making a poster
In making a poster the following hints may be useful
your poster should be clearly set out, the structure should be clear at a glance;
people do not like reading a lot of text. Diagrams and flow charts are much easier to take in; text should be
readable from at least 2 m;
explanations should be separate from the main story, perhaps in distinctive boxes; and
the level must be appropriate for the expected audience: you will need to think about what the audience i s likely
to know already.

Making an audio-visual presentation
In making an audio-visual presentation the following hints may be useful:
before you start, make sure you have everything ready and you know how to switch on the OHP or operate the
data projector and that it is focussed correctly;

rn start the presentation with something designed to capture attention and to help your audience to know what to
expect;
do not read directly from notes: use notes if you need to, but always talk directly to your audience;

rn people get bored if they have nothing to do but listen to you talking: make sure that there i s always something to
look at as well;
make sure your visual aids are prepared well beforehand: they are a very effective way of getting information
across to your audience;

rn if you are drawing formulae on a white board or black board make sure that you know them by heart (draw
them out beforehand): you should not have to keep looking at your notes to make sure that you have got
something right;
remember that you are always more familiar with your subject matter than your audience: give them time to take
in what you are saying before going on to the next stage; and

rn mannerisms are irritating, so try to stand still, look at your audience and do not wave your hands about, or keep
scratching your nose or trip over the O H P lead!

RSmC

Paracetamol formulations - page 7 of 7

0

The preparation of paracetamol
Paracetamol can be made in three steps from phenol

HO

{o)

di1uteH2s04t

HO

(0)-N02

+

HO-(o)

NaN03

36% yield

25% yield

Step 1

Ho-(o)NaBH4

NO2

HO-(o)-NH2

Pd / 1 mol dm-3 NaOH
74% yield

Step 2

Ethanoic
anhydride
HO

NH2

HO
Water,
Room temp.

N
+

0

Step 3

@

The preparation of paracetamol - page 7 o f 5

RSC

Step I - the nitration of phenol
25% yield

36% yield

Preparing 4-nitrophenol and 2-nitrophenol

Safety
Wear eye protection. Protective gloves should be worn when handling phenol.

Sodium nitrate(V) - oxidising agent, keep away from flammable material.
Concentrated sulfuric acid - very corrosive dense liquid, dehydrating agent, add very
slowly with constant stirring to water whilst cooling.
Phenol - toxic by ingestion and skin absorption. It can cause severe burns. Take care
when removing phenol from the bottle because the solid crystals can be hard to break
up. Wear protective gloves and work in a fume cupboard.
2- and 4-nitrophenols - harmful and irritant, will stain skin, wear protective gloves
when handling.

1. Place a 3-necked round bottom flask in an ice water bath and place a thermometer
into one of the necks. Place 15 g of sodium nitrate(V) into the flask, add 40 c m j o f
water and stir.

2. Cautiously add concentrated sulfuric acid (13.6 cm3; 25 g) to the stirred solution.
3. Slowly add solid phenol (9.4 g , 0.1 mol) at such a rate that the temperature of the
solution does not rise above 20 "C (about a half a spatula at a time over about 20
minutes) and then stir, preferably with a magnetic stirrer, for 2 hours.

4. Remove the thermometer. Decant off the supernatant liquid and add water (25-30
cm3)to the residue. Put a dropping funnel into one of the necks and a stillhead and
condenser into another. Insert a stopper in the third.

5 . Heat the mixture, and distil off one of the components with the steam. At the same
time add water to the mixture through the dropping funnel at a similar rate.

6. Stop the distillation once the product has stopped coming over, then filter the
distillate to give crystals of the 2-nitrophenol isomer.

7. Cool the residual solution in the distillation flask, then filter off the other solid
isomer (4-nitrophenol) and recrystallise it from 0.5 mol dmp3 hydrochloric acid.

Questions
1. Why does the reaction give a mixture of isomers? What other product might you
get?

2. Why does the nitration need only mild conditions, whilst benzene requires
concentrated H,S04/H NO,?

3. What happens when you add concentrated sulfuric acid to sodium nitrate(\/)!
4. The products can be separated by a simple steam distillation procedure. The
2-nitrophenol product is volatile in steam but the 4-nitrophenol is not. Why?
5. The two products can be separated by chromatography. The 2-nitrophenol has less
affinity for silica ( i e runs faster) than the 4-nitrophenol. W h y ?

6. What are the melting points of the pure products?Why is one lower than the other?

7. Dissolve each product in water - which solution is more acidic and why?

RSaC

The preparation o f paracetamol - page 2 o f 5

8. Look up the melting points of the following pairs of compounds (be careful how
you interpret the names).
3-methyl-2-nitrophenol
3-methyl-4-nitrophenol
5-methyl-2-nitrophenol
3-methyl-+nitrophenol
5-fluoro-2-nitrophenol
3-f1uoro-4-nitrophenol
What do you notice about the melting points?

@

The preparation of paracetamol - page 3 of 5

RSaC

Step 2 - the reduction of a nitro
group to an amine
74% yield

Preparing 4-aminophenol

Safety
Wear eye protection.

Sodium tetrahydridoborate(ll1) - harmful if swallowed, reacts with water to produce
hydrogen; the reaction is more vigorous with acids - keep away from flames.
4-nitrophenol - irritant, will stain skin, wear gloves when handling.
Sodium hydroxide solution (1 mol dm-') - corrosive - avoid contact with eyes.
Palladium on charcoal (5% or 1 Oo/o) - Irritant. Do not breathe dust.
Hydrochloric acid (2 mol dmP3)- irritant.
Sodium hydrogen carbonate - reacts with acids to produce carbon dioxide. The
reaction can be delayed and violent. Add cautiously with constant agitation and hold
the flask over a dish to catch any spill-over.

4-aminophenol - harmful, possible risk of irreverisble effects, very toxic to aquatic
organisms.
Note - This reaction needs careful temperature control.

1. Place 10 cm3 (10 mmol) of 1 mol dmP3sodium hydroxide in a conical flask.

2. Add 0.56 g (14.7 mmol) of sodium tetrahydridoborate(ll1) (sodium borohydride),
followed by 50 mg of palladium on charcoal (5% or 10%; Aldrich).

3. Cool in ice to -1 3 "C.

4. Add 1.O g (7.2 mmol) of 4-nitrophenol in very small portions (half a microspatula at
a time) over 30 minutes. Make sure the temperature is kept between 13-1 7 "C
during the addition.

5. After the addition is complete the mixture should be stirred for a further 15 min and
acidified with 2 mol dm-3 hydrochloric acid (about 17 cm3).

6. Filter the mixture to remove catalyst and adjust the filtrate to p H 7-8 by carefully
adding solid sodium hydrogencarbonate a little at a time.

7. Filter off the precipitate and wash with a little cold water to give 4-aminophenol
(0.58 g; 74%) after drying.

Questions
1 . Sodiu m tetra hyd ridoborate(I I I) (sodium borohyd r ide), NaB H, is relatively stable in
aqueous sodium hydroxide (NaOH) but not in acid. Why?

2. What is the role of the catalyst in the reduction of nitro groups? Can other methods
be used for this reduction?

3. Why can the product be separated from unreacted starting material at p H 82
4. Why i s sodium hydrogencarbonate used to make the reaction mixture basic at the
end of the reaction, rather than sodium carbonate or sodium hydroxide?
5. W h y i s the product soluble in a solution of a strong acid or i n a solution of a strong
base, but not in a solution of a weak base?

RSaC

The preparation of paracetamol - page 4 of 5

Step 3 - the formation of an
amide
Ethanoic
anhydride

HO
Water,
Room temp.

CH3

0

Preparing N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)ethanamide - Paracetamol

Safety
Wear eye protection.

4-aminophenol - irritant.
Ethanoic anhydride - corrosive, causes burns, flammable, the vapour will irritate the
eyes and the respiratory system. Use in a fume cupboard.
Paracetamol - do not ingest.

1 . Place 1 .O g of 4-aminophenol and 9 cm3 of distilled water in a 50 cm3 conical flask
and stir briskly at room temperature, in order to suspend the solid in the water.

2. In a fume cupboard, add 1.1 cm3 (1.1 7 g) of ethanoic anhydride to the stirred
suspension and gently shake to mix. The solid will dissolve after about 30 seconds.
Continue shaking and a precipitate will form after 2 minutes.

3. After 10 minutes the solid should be filtered off under suction, washed with a little
cold water and dried (0.83g; 60%).

4. The product may be purified by crystallisation from distilled water. Dissolve the
crude product in the minimum of distilled water at about 80 "C (you will probably
require about 15 cm3).

5. Allow the clear solution to cool slowly to room temperature and collect the
recrystallised product by suction filtration, washing with 5 cm3 of ice-cold distilled
water.

6. Dry the recrystallised product either between filter papers or by gently warming in
an oven, and determine the yield.

7. Determine the melting point of the dry, recrystallised product.
The melting point should be 169-1 71 "C.

Questions
1. Why is the product insoluble in aqueous ethanoic acid, but the starting material is
sol uble l

2. If the reaction is done in dilute hydrochloric acid rather than water, the product is

Explain why this is.

The preparation of paracetamol- page 5 of 5

RSeC

The quantitative analysis of various formulations of paracetamol
The British Pharmacopoeia method for the analysis of paracetamol involves heating it
under reflux with 1mot dmP3sulfuric acid. This i s a straightforward, acid catalysed,
hydrolysis of an amide to an amine and a carboxylic acid. The 4-aminophenol which
is formed is then titrated with an oxidising agent, ammonium cerium(lV) sulfate using
ferroin as the indicator.
The first reaction is as follows:

HZO/H~SO~

* H O < o ) N b

' " ' F C H 3
0

0
4-aminophenol

Ethanoic acid

The titration step is much more interesting. 4-Aminophenol can easily be oxidised as
follows:

4-aminophenol

lminoquinone

The role of the ammonium cerium(lV) sulfate is to oxidise the 4-aminophenol to the
iminoquinone. Only after all the 4-aminophenol has been oxidised w i l l the cerium (IV)
reagent oxidise the ferroin indicator from Fe2+to Fe3+(ferriin).

Ferroin (red)

Ferriin (blue)

During the titration the solution should be red, and the yellow end point is the
transition from red to pale blue.

It is easy to work out that, since 1 mole of Ce4+i s equivalent to 0.5 mole of
paracetamol, the conversion factor given in the method is correct.

RSeC

Quantitative analysis of paracetamol- page 1 o f 2

@

Procedure as outlined in the British Pharmacopoeia 1988
Safety
Wear eye protection.

Paracetamol formulations - do not ingest.
Sulfuric acid (1 rnol dmP3)- corrosive, especially when hot.
Hydrochloric acid (2 rnol dmP3)- irritant.
Ferroin solution - hazards unknown. May cause skin irritation.
Ammonium cerium(lV) sulfate - respiratory tract irritai t, strong oxidising agent, keep
away from flammable material.

1. Dissolve 0.3 g of a mixture containing paracetamol n a mixture of water ( I o cm3)
and 1 rnol dm-3 sulfuric acid (30 cm’).

2. Boil under reflux for 1 hour, cool and dilute with water (I00 cm’).

3. To 20 cm3 of the resulting solution add cold water (40 cm3, 2 rnol dm-’
hydrochloric acid (1 5 cm3) and ferroin solution (0.1 cm’, 0.1 w t % or
0.025 niol dm-3).
4. Titrate with 0.1 rnol dm-’ ammonium cerium(lV) sulfate (VS - volumetric standard)
until a yellow colour is produced.

5. Repeat the operation without the test material being present. The difference
between the titration figures represents the amount of ammonium cerium(lV) sulfate
required. Each cm3 of 0.1 rnol dmP3ammonium cerium(lV) sulfate is equivalent to
0.007560 g of paracetamol.

This method can be used to analyse the quantity of paracetamol present in many
medicines that contain the drug.

Question
H o w could you prove that the first step in the quantitative analysis of paracetamol
involves hydrolysis to 4-am inop henol ?

0

Quantitative analysis of paracetamol- page 2 of 2

RSC

Using thin-layer chromatography to investigate the reactions
You have probably used a simple chromatography experiment as part of your earlier studies to separate the dyes in a
coloured ink. The same technique can be used to separate substances which are not dyes but in such experiments
the chromatogram must be developed to show up the various different substances that have been separated.
Chromatography techniques are used a great deal in industry because they can be controlled very precisely and use
very small amounts of substance. In this activity you investigate the purity and identity of your laboratory prepared
samples of nitrophenol or paracetamol using thin-layer chromatography (tlc). In this activity all the substances are
white or pale yellow so you will need to develop the plate before you can see what has happened.
Thin-layer chromatography is a powerful tool for determining if two compounds are identical. A spot of the
compound being investigated i s placed on a chromatography plate, and a spot of a pure manufactured sample of the
same substance is placed next to it. The plate i s then allowed to stand in a suitable solvent, which travels up the
plate. If the compound to be identified leaves exactly the same pattern on the chromatography plate as the known
pure compound it is reasonable to conclude that they are the same. However, if extra spots are observed as well as
the characteristic pattern of the known compound, then impurities are likely to be present in the sample.
In the experiment both crude samples of 2-nitrophenol and 4-nitrophenol are compared with known samples.

Safety
Wear eye protection.
Ethyl ethanoate - volatile, highly flammable, keep away from flames, irritant, do not inhale vapour.
Cyclohexane - volatile, highly flammable, keep away from flames, harmful, do not inhale vapour.
Iodine - harmful by inhalation or skin contact.
Short wave UV - may cause skin cancer and eye damage. Do not observe directly. The viewer should be screened
from direct radiation.

1 . Make sure that you do not touch the surface of the tlc plate with your fingers during this activity. Handle the
plate only by the edges and use tweezers if possible.

2. Take a tlc plate and using a pencil (not a ball-point or felt tip pen) lightly draw a line across the plate about 1 cm
from the bottom. Mark four equally spaced points on this line.

3. Place small amounts (about 1/3 of a spatula measure) of your crude 2-nitropheno1, your crude 4-nitrophenol and
the commercial samples of these in four separate test-tubes. Label the test-tubes so that you know which is
which.

1

I

4. Add 1 cm3 of ethyl ethanoate to the test-tubes to dissolve the samples. If possible do this in a fume cupboard.
5 . Use clean capillary tubes to spot each of your four samples onto the tlc plate. Allow the spots to dry and then
repeat. The spots should be about 1-2 m m in diameter.

6. After all the spots are dry, place the tlc plate in the chromatography tank making sure that the original pencil line
i s above the level of the developing solvent - ethyl ethanoate:cyclohexane 1 :4. Put a lid on the tank and allow to
stand in a fume cupboard until the solvent front has risen to within a few millimetres of the top of the plate.

RSeC

Using chromatography to investigate the reactions - page 7 of 3

0

Rf value = a/b
Position for
initial spots

7. Remove the plate from the tank and quickly mark the position of the solvent front. Allow the plate to dry.

8. Observe the plate under a short wavelength U V lamp and lightly mark with a pencil any spots observed.
9. Carefully place the plate in a jar or beaker containing a few iodine crystals. Put a cover on the jar and wait for
the spots to appear. Do this in a fume cupboard if possible.

Results
W Draw a diagram to show which spots appeared under UV light and which appear with iodine.
Determine the R, value of the samples using the expression

R, = distance moved by sample / distance moved by solvent
Questions
1. Write a short paragraph explaining why some substances move further up the tlc plate than others and how the
results are made visible.

2. What conclusions can you draw about the nature of the four samples tested?

Other experiments
The conversion of 4-aminophenol into paracetamol can be followed using ethyl ethanoate:cyclohexane 2:l as the
eluant.
This system can also be used to monitor the hydrolysis step in the quantitative analysis.
To test aqueous mixtures, take a small sample (less than 1 cm3) and place in a test-tube. Adjust the solution to p H 8
by adding small amounts of sodium hydrogen carbonate. Add ethyl ethanoate (1 cm3) and shake. Allow the layers to
separate and use a capillary tube to sample the upper ethyl ethanoate layer for tlc.
Control of the p H of the aqueous sample is important to ensure the organic compound i s not ionised otherwise it
will not extract effectively or run on a tlc plate. Use known samples of 4-aminophenol and paracetamol as reference
samples on the plate.
This could form a separate investigation to semi-quantitatively look at aqueous p H versus how much can be
extracted with ethyl ethanoate. Look at the spot size after running a tlc. Investigate paracetamol, 4-aminophenol and
4-nitrophenol.

Using chromatography to investigate the reactions - page 2 of 3

RSmC

Appendix
Column chromatography - the separation of 2- and 4-nitrophenols

Safety
Wear eye protection.
Use a column with a sintered glass disc.

Ethyl ethanoate - volatile, highly flammable, keep away from flames, irritant, do not
inhale vapour.
Cyclohexane - volatile, highly flammable, keep away from flames, harmful, do not
inhale vapour.
Silica - its dust is a respiratory tract irritant.
Petroleum ether 60-80 "C - harmful, highly flammable
(It is possible to use solid phase extraction cartridges (10 g silica) and reduce the scale)

A full risk assessment should be carried out prior to starting the experiment.
Add sand to the disc to a depth of 5-10 mm, and add the solvent mixture to fill the
column to about one-third. The solvent is ethyl ethan0ate:cyclohexane 1 :4 (petroleum
ether 60-80 "C can be used instead of cyclohexane)
Weigh out silica (50 g) (in a fume cupboard and wearing gloves) and add enough
solvent to give a mobile (runny) slurry. Pour this gently into the column with the tap
open. Run the solvent down to the top of the silica while tapping the column a few
times to pack the particles closely in it. Gently add another 5-1 0 mm layer of sand to
the top of the material in the column.
Dissolve a mixture of the nitrophenols (0.25 g of each) in ethyl ethanoate (0.25 cm3)
and dilute with cyclohexane (2 cm3). Carefully apply the solution to the sand on top of
the column. Run the mixture onto the silica by opening the tap slightly and gently
adding solvent. Once the phenols are on the silica and off the sand, fill the column
with solvent, adding it very slowly at first so as not to disturb the top layer.
Start running the column by opening the tap, using a modest drip rate, and collect
fractions in test-tubes. Keep topping up the solvent head at this point.
Check each fraction by tlc using the same solvent mixture, and combine the fractions
which contain the same component of the mixture. Evaporate off the solvent, by
leaving the solution in a small open vessel in a fume cupboard.

RSC

Using chromatography to investigate the reactions - page 3 of 3

RSmC

Teachers’ notes
Presentation activity
Paracetamol can be taken in a number of ways. Tablets (500 mg) - the simplest form of
taking a medicine for most adults - 1 or 2 tablets is well below the level at which there
are toxic effects.
Fizzy dispersible tablets (500 mg) - for adults who have trouble swallowing tablets.
The paracetamol i s mixed with citric acid and sodium hydrogencarbonate which
effervesce when put into water. The effervescence rapidly disperses the drug into a fine
suspension.
Paediatric oral solutions (12 0 mg/5 cm3) - for young children who cannot take tablets note that the recommended dose is a quarter of the adult dose. Also note that this
concentration is higher than the normal aqueous solubility - this can be achieved by
adding a little ethanol.
Oral suspensions (250 mg/5 cm’) - for older children and adults who dislike tablets. It
has to be a suspension at this concentration as it will not dissolve sufficiently.
Suppositories (125 mg) - drugs are rapidly absorbed from the colon and metabolism is
significantly reduced because the drug does not have to go via the stomach, therefore
the dose can be lower.
Capsules (various dosages) -the gelatin coating is ‘slippery’ and the cylindrical shape
makes the capsules easier to swallow than tablets. Also, it is a simple way of delivering
a mixture of solids.

RSaC
The toxicity of paracetamol - information sheet
Why is paracetamol toxic at high doses?
Paracetamol is metabolised to some extent by oxidation to an iminoquinone in a way
similar to the chemistry described in the quantitative analysis section. Although the
iminoquinone is a very reactive compound, it i s rapidly deactivated and converted into
a highly water soluble derivative by the addition of endogenous glutathione - a small
peptide with a thiol (-SH) group. This 'conjugation' by glutathione is a very common
elimination pathway of the body. The reaction makes 'foreign' compounds so water
soluble that they are excreted in the urine.
Our bodies only have a limited amount of glutathione available at any one time and so
an overdose of paracetamol rapidly depletes this protective chemical. This depletion
allows the iminoquinone and other toxins to build up and seriously damage our cells.
With a knowledge of this chemistry it is easy to understand why the antidote for
paracetamol overdose is acetylcysteine, a simple non-toxic thiol which can deactivate
the iminoquinone. Acetylcysteine is also a precursor for glutathione synthesis.

Apparatus lists and
answers
The extraction and purification of paracetamol from tablets
Chemicals (per group)
W Two paracetamol tablets
W

Propanone

Apparatus and equipment (per group)
H Two conical flasks
Measuring cylinder

H Warm water bath
H Filter funnel and filter papers

H Beaker
W Pipette

W Small piece of cotton wool
W Glass funnel
W Hot and cold water
Bunsen burner, tripod and gauze
Access to melting point apparatus

W Access to a balance

1 Eye protection
This activity could be set as an open ended investigation.

Answer
The initial crude sample contains impurities or ingredients that were not removed in
the extraction process. A purer compound has a higher melting point. Impurities
present in compounds lower the melting point by affecting the crystal structure, so the
crystals do not pack together as well.

The preparation of paracetamol
Step 1 - the nitration of phenol
Preparing 2-nitrophenol and 4-nitrophenol
Chemicals (per group)
Concentrated sulfuric acid

W Sodium nitrate(V)
W Solid phenol

1 Hydrochloric acid (0.5 mol dm-3)
Apparatus and equipment (per group)
H 3-necked round bottom flask

H Magnetic stirrer
W Ice bath
H Thermometer

RSaC
Quickfit@distillation apparatus (still head, condenser, stoppers)
Dropping funnel

W Spatulas
Access to a balance

W Access to a fume cupboard

Answers
1. It i s possible to get 2- and 4- substitution of the ring due to effective charge
stabilisation at both these sites. The -OH group activates the ring preferentially at
the 2- and 4- positions and therefore directs substituents to these positions (rather
than to the 3- and 5- positions which are not activated). Another product could be
the di-substituted form:

2. Phenol activates the ring to electrophilic attack because the lone pair on the
oxygen pushes electron density onto the ring. This means nitration is easier and
does not require such harsh conditions.

3. H,SO,

+ 2NaN0, -+ Na,SO, + 2HN0,

Then in excess sulfuric acid: HNO, + H,SO,

--+ NO,' + HS0,- + H,O

This i s sometimes seen as: HNO, + 2H,SO, -+ NO,'

+ 2HS0,-

+H,+O

4. 4-Nitrophenol i s better at hydrogen bonding with other molecules of 4-nitrophenol
and/or water so it is less volatile. 2-nitrophenol has intramolecular hydrogen
bonding and consequently, fewer intermolecular hydrogen bonds with other
molecules, so is more volatile.

5. 2-Nitrophenol is less polar due to intramolecular hydrogen bonding.

6. Melting point of pure 4-nitrophenol = 1 1 3.8 "C
Melting point of pure 2-nitrophenol = 45.1 "C
4-Nitrophenol has a higher melting point due to intermolecular hydrogen bonding,
holding the molecules together in the crystal.

7. 4-Nitrophenol is more acidic. The hydrogen on the O H of the 2-nitrophenol is
stabilised by intramolecular hydrogen bonding and so it is not released as readily.

8. This question gives three examples of pairs of nitro phenols where the 2-isomer has
a lower melting point than the 4-isomer. The melting points can be found in a
general chemical supplies catalogue such as Aldrich - Handbook of Fine
Chemicals and Laboratory Equipment.
3-methyl-2-nitrophenol m.p. 35-39 "C
3-methyl-4-nitrophenol m.p. 127-1 29 "C
5-methyl-2-nitrophenol m.p. 53-56 "C
3-methyl-4-nitrophenol m.p. 127-1 29 "C
5-fluoro-2-nitrophenol m.p. 35-37 "C
3-f I uoro-4-nitrophenol m .p. 93-95 "C
It is an interesting exercise in seeing how names and locants change in that 3- and
5-substituents are in fact the same position with respect to the phenol - O H .

RSeC
Other examples that can be found in the Dictionary of Organic Compounds (published
by Chapman & Hall):
3-chloro-2-nitrophenol m.p. 37-38 "C
3-chloro-4-nitrophenol m.p. 121-1 22 "C
5-chloro-2-nitrophenol m.p. 42-43 "C
5-methoxy-2-nitrophenol m.p. 95-96 "C

3-methoxoy-4-nitrophenol m.p. 144-1 45 "C.

Step 2 - the reduction of a nitro group to an amine
Preparing 4-aminophenol
Chemicals (per group)
H 4-Nitrophenol

H Sodium tetrahyd ridoborate(I I I) (sodium borohyd ride)
H Sodium hydroxide (1 mol dmp3)
H Palladium on charcoal (5% or 1 O%, Aldrich)

W Hydrochloric acid (2 mol dm-3)
H Sodium hydrogencarbonate
Apparatus and equipment (per group)
H 2 Wide mouthed conical flasks or beakers

H Magnetic stirrer
H Thermometer
W Spatula
Measuring cylinder
Filter paper and funnel

H Water pump
H Buchner flask and funnel

H Microspatula
H Eye protection
Answers
1. In acid solution you would get hydrogen gas released, H+ + H-+ H,

2. The catalyst provides a surface for the reaction to take place on by forming weak
association bonds with the catalyst surface. This in turn weakens the strong nitro
bonds. Other methods that could be used are:
- Sn/conc HCI followed by NaHCO,
- H,/Pd
- LiAIH,
3. NO, group in the starting material makes the phenol OH more acidic than in the
product (NH, is less electron withdrawing) and therefore dissolves in the basic
solution while the product precipitates out.
4. Sodium carbonate and sodium hydroxide are strong enough bases to remove the
H+ from the products as well. Sodium hydrogencarbonate allows differentiation
between product and starting material.

5. In strong acid or base a salt i s produced that is water soluble. (A strong acid will
protonate the -NH, to give -NH,+, ie soluble; a strong base will deprotonate -OH
also soluble.)
to give -0-

RSaC
Step 3 - the formation of an amide
Preparing N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)ethanamide - Paracetamol
Chemicals (per group)
4 4-Aminophenol
Ethanoic anhydride

Apparatus and equipment (per group)
Two 50 cm3 conical flasks
One 100 cm3 beaker

4 Tripod and gauze
4 Bunsen Burner

1 Thermometer (-1 0 "C to 110 "C)
4 Buchner flask, funnel and filter papers
4 Melting point apparatus

4 Glass rod or magnetic stirrer
4 One 10 cm3 and one 50 cm3 measuring cylinder

4 Clamp and stand
4 Access to oven and fume cupboard

4 Ice and water supply
4 Water pump
I Eye protection
Answers
1. Amides are not basic because the lone pair on nitrogen is delocalised over the
carbonyl group. They are therefore not soluble in acid. Amines are basic and do
dissolve in acid.

2. At low pH the NH, i s protonated and allows the OH to react with ethanoic
anhydride. The ester that is produced i s still soluble in the acid due to -NH,
protonation, but due to partial dissociation, this group i s eventually ethanoylated
and thrown out of the solution. At higher pH, the NH, i s not protonated and
rapidly gets ethanoylated and thrown out of solution before the -OH has a chance
to react.

The quantitative analysis of various formulations of the reactions
Chemicals
4 Sulfuric acid (1 mol dmP3)

4 Hydrochloric acid (2 mol dm-3)
4 Ammonium cerium(lV) sulfate (0.1 mol dm-j)
4 Paracetamol
I Water
Ferroin solution (0.1o/o wt or 0.025 mol dm-3)

Apparatus and equipment (per group)
4 Round bottom flask

4 Quick fit reflux apparatus

4 Heating mantle, or Bunsen burner, tripod and gauze
4 Clamps and stand
I Spatula

One 10 cm3 measuring cylinder

W One 50 cm3 measuringcylinder
W Burette

W Two conical flasks

W Beaker
Eye protection

Procedure as outlined in the British Pharmacopoeia 1988
Answer
Isolate the material and characterize it, determine the melting point and compare it
with the previous one, also tlc, or follow the reaction by running tlc plates using
paracetamol and 4-aminophenol as reference spots.

Using thin-layer chromatographyto investigatethe reactions
Chemicals (per group)
W 2-Nitrophenol

W 4-Nitrophenol
Ethyl ethanoate
Cyclohexane
Iodine
Solid sodium hydrogencarbonate

Apparatus and equipment (per group)
W Four test-tubes

W Marker pen and pencil
W Access to fume cupboard
W Capillary melting point tubes
W TIC plate (or chromatography no. 1 paper)
W Chromatography tank (or 1 dm3 beaker)
W Measuring cylinders

W Spatula
W Access to UV lamp screened from direct view

W Eye protection
Answers
1. Less polar substances move further up the plate because they have less affinity for
polar silica - results made visible using ultraviolet light, iodine staining or
potassium permanganate staining.
2. Dependent on results.

